# brain-tumor-classification-and-segmentation


A brain tumor is a collection of abnormal cells in the brain. Brain tumors may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous(benign). As benign or malignant tumors grow, they increase the pressure on the patient’s skull. It can cause brain damage. Damage to the brain can be life-threatening. Therefore, identification and treatment of the brain tumor at the early phase are essential.

This idea propose a classification model using CNN via transfer learning and a segmentation model using ResUNET, which can provide a high accuracy and low false-positive rate. Deep learning based algorithms requires large amount of data for training and retrieving such large data is difficult process. To overcome this issue, in this idea, we propose a classification model using deep learning and uses a pre-trained VGG16 model to extract the features from data that containing MRI images. And used swish as the activation function to implement the classification model. The VGG16 model is specifically used to build dense convolution networks for large-scale visual recognition, making it an ideal choice for tumor classification. The classification model focuses on distinguishing three unique brain tumors: glioma, meningioma, and pituitary. We identify tumor position using segmentation model. ResUNET architecture is used to construct a segmentation model. The performance of the model was evaluated using MRI images. Diagnosis of a brain tumor is made through MRI scan which does not expose patients to ionizing radiation. So we use data containing MRI images for the evaluation of performance of the proposed model. The proposed model provides better accuracy than the existing models. The proposed segmentation model achieved a Tversky of 95.5%, and the classification model achieved an accuracy of 98.22% on the validation data.

Importance: AI has changed Medical Industry in many ways. Implementation of this idea can assist medical professionals in the diagnostics of brain tumors. Brain tumors are abnormal growths of tissues in the brain or central spine that can affect normal brain function. So the identification and treatment of the brain tumor at the beginning phases is vital. Brain tumor segmentation is an important task in medical image processing. Early diagnosis of brain tumors plays an important role in improving treatment possibilities and increases the survival rate of the patients. There is a need for automatic brain tumor image segmentation. Our segmentation model and classification model can assist medical professionals in the diagnostics of brain tumors.


Dataset link: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1RXp8giNYelbGisY2uPxDl3OO7DzVImin?usp=sharing
